.TH TDOC 1 "May 2026" "TDOC 2.2.0" "Termux Utilities"
.SH NAME
tdoc \- Termux Doctor, diagnostic and repair utility for Termux environment

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tdoc
[\fICOMMAND\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B TDOC
(Termux Doctor) is a diagnostic and repair utility for the Termux environment.
It scans the system for common configuration issues, missing components,
repository problems, and provides guided fixes.
It also scans project repositories for syntax errors, code bugs, language key
mismatches, unreferenced modules, and other structural issues.

TDOC is designed to be safe, transparent, and fully compatible with the
Termux package ecosystem.

.SH COMMANDS

.SS Diagnosis
.TP
.B scan
Run a full Termux system scan. Checks storage, repository, Python, Node.js,
Git, Termux environment, and dpkg health. If the current directory is a
project folder (contains .git, Dockerfile, package.json, etc.), TDOC also
automatically runs a full code scan on the repository.

.TP
.B repo-scan [\fIpath\fR]
Scan a project folder for syntax errors, bugs, deprecated patterns, and
structural issues. Defaults to the current directory. Supported checks:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
\fBShell/Bash\fR (.sh .bash) \(em bash -n syntax check + ShellCheck (if installed)
.IP \(bu 2
\fBPython\fR (.py) \(em SyntaxError / IndentationError via py_compile
.IP \(bu 2
\fBJavaScript\fR (.js .mjs) \(em node --check
.IP \(bu 2
\fBYAML\fR (.yml .yaml) \(em PyYAML safe-load
.IP \(bu 2
\fBJSON\fR (.json) \(em json.load validation
.IP \(bu 2
\fBTOML\fR (.toml) \(em tomllib / tomli validation
.IP \(bu 2
\fBDockerfile\fR \(em missing FROM, deprecated instructions
.IP \(bu 2
\fBrequirements.txt\fR \(em unpinned dependencies
.IP \(bu 2
\fBpackage.json\fR \(em unpinned npm dependencies
.IP \(bu 2
\fBMakefile\fR \(em TAB vs spaces enforcement
.IP \(bu 2
\fBMarkdown\fR (.md) \(em broken relative links
.IP \(bu 2
\fBLog files\fR (.log .out .err) \(em traceback/error pattern detection
.IP \(bu 2
\fBLang key sync\fR \(em missing/orphan keys between lang/en.sh and other lang files
.IP \(bu 2
\fBt() key audit\fR \(em t() calls in .sh files cross-checked against lang/en.sh
.IP \(bu 2
\fBSource guards\fR \(em scripts using $TDOC_ROOT/$PREFIX without :?guard
.IP \(bu 2
\fBUnreferenced functions\fR \(em defined but never called from other files
.IP \(bu 2
\fBUnreferenced modules\fR \(em .sh files never sourced anywhere
.IP \(bu 2
\fBUndefined calls\fR \(em check_*/fix_* called but never defined
.RE
Results are saved to ~/.tdoc/repo_fix_state.env for use by repo-fix.

.TP
.B repo-fix [\fI--auto\fR|\fI--preview\fR]
Fix issues found by the last repo-scan run. Reads structured state from
~/.tdoc/repo_fix_state.env. Without flags, prompts interactively for each
fixable issue.
.RS
.TP
.B --preview
Show what actions would be performed without making any changes.
.TP
.B --auto
Apply all automatable fixes without prompting.
.RE
Automatically fixable: InvalidJSON (reformat), UnpinnedDep (pip freeze),
LangKeyMissing (stub from en.sh), LangKeyOrphan (remove), MakefileSpace
(convert spaces to tabs), MissingSourceGuard (insert guard).
Manual-only: ShellSyntax, PythonSyntax, UndefCall, BrokenMdLink,
UnrefFunc, UnrefModule.

.TP
.B diagnose [\fI-f\fR \fIlogfile\fR]
Diagnose an error by pasting it interactively or reading from a file.
.RS
.TP
.B (no arguments)
Prompts for multi-line input. Paste error message, traceback, or tdoc
repo-scan output. Submit with an empty line.
.TP
.B -f \fIlogfile\fR
Read error text from a file. Works best with .log, .out, .err files.
For source/documentation files, use tdoc repo-scan instead.
.TP
.B --last
Diagnose the output of the last tdoc repo-scan run automatically.
.RE
When network is available, sends input to the AI engine for structured
diagnosis (DIAGNOSIS, ROOT CAUSE, HOW TO FIX, PREVENTION). Falls back to
40+ static pattern matcher when offline.

.TP
.B status
Show last scan status from the state file.

.TP
.B explain
Explain detected problems and their causes interactively.

.TP
.B check \fIpackage\fR
Ad-hoc status check for any Termux package — checks binary availability,
dpkg status, and apt-cache info.

.SS Fix
.TP
.B fix
Attempt to fix detected Termux system issues interactively.

.TP
.B fix --preview
Show what actions would be performed without making changes.

.TP
.B fix --auto
Automatically fix detected Termux system issues without prompting.

.SS Report
.TP
.B checkup [\fI--save\fR|\fI--json\fR]
Generate a full shareable health report: device info, Android version,
Termux environment, CPU/RAM/storage, installed tool versions, repository
sources, scan state, dpkg audit, and fix history.
.RS
.TP
.B --save
Save report to ~/.tdoc/checkup_<timestamp>.txt
.TP
.B --json
Output report in machine-readable JSON format.
.RE

.TP
.B history
Display scan and fix history from ~/.tdoc/report.json.

.TP
.B doctor --json
Output full diagnostic information in JSON format.

.TP
.B doctor --json-ai
Output diagnostic information with AI-generated analysis in JSON format.

.TP
.B doctor --live [\fIseconds\fR]
Continuous monitoring mode. Re-scans every N seconds (default: 60) and
notifies via termux-notification on status changes. Same as tdoc watch.

.SS Security
.TP
.B security
Analyze repository security and configuration.

.TP
.B security --json
Output repository security analysis in JSON format.

.SS Tools
.TP
.B watch [\fIseconds\fR]
Alias for tdoc doctor --live. Monitors system health continuously and
alerts on state changes. Minimum interval: 10 seconds.

.TP
.B benchmark
Measure storage write speed, network latency to Termux mirrors, and
CPU/RAM information.

.TP
.B lang list
List all available display languages and show the currently active one.

.TP
.B lang set \fIcode\fR
Set and persist the display language (e.g.
.B en
or
.BR id ).
Saved to ~/.tdoc/config.

.TP
.B version
Display TDOC version, codename, and build date.

.TP
.B update
Display instructions for updating TDOC via git or the Termux package manager.

.TP
.B help
Display help information.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --lang \fIcode\fR
One-shot language override for a single command without saving.
Example:
.B tdoc --lang id scan

.SH FILES
.TP
.I $PREFIX/lib/tdoc/
TDOC core files (core/, modules/, lang/, data/, man/).

.TP
.I $PREFIX/lib/tdoc/VERSION
Version metadata file (KEY=VALUE format). Single source of truth for
TDOC_VERSION, TDOC_CODENAME, TDOC_BUILD_DATE.

.TP
.I $PREFIX/bin/tdoc
TDOC executable.

.TP
.I $PREFIX/share/man/man1/tdoc.1
Manual page.

.TP
.I $PREFIX/var/lib/tdoc/state.env
Last system scan state (KEY=VALUE pairs).

.TP
.I ~/.tdoc/config
Persistent user configuration (e.g. TDOC_LANG=id).

.TP
.I ~/.tdoc/report.json
Scan and fix history in JSON format.

.TP
.I ~/.tdoc/repo_fix_state.env
Structured repo-scan results consumed by tdoc repo-fix.
Format: KEY=BROKEN:filepath:lineno

.TP
.I ~/.tdoc/repo_scan_last.txt
Plain-text output of the last repo-scan for use by tdoc diagnose --last.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
General error, invalid command, or file not found.
.TP
.B 127
TDOC core directory not found at $PREFIX/lib/tdoc.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Run full system diagnostics:
.RS
.B tdoc scan
.RE

.TP
Scan current project for code issues:
.RS
.B tdoc repo-scan
.RE

.TP
Preview what repo-fix would do:
.RS
.B tdoc repo-fix --preview
.RE

.TP
Auto-fix all fixable repo issues:
.RS
.B tdoc repo-fix --auto
.RE

.TP
Diagnose an error interactively:
.RS
.B tdoc diagnose
.RE

.TP
Diagnose from a log file:
.RS
.B tdoc diagnose -f /tmp/app_crash.log
.RE

.TP
Diagnose last repo-scan output:
.RS
.B tdoc diagnose --last
.RE

.TP
Generate a full health report and save it:
.RS
.B tdoc checkup --save
.RE

.TP
Monitor system health every 30 seconds:
.RS
.B tdoc watch 30
.RE

.TP
Automatically fix detected Termux system problems:
.RS
.B tdoc fix --auto
.RE

.TP
Get JSON output for scripting:
.RS
.B tdoc doctor --json
.RE

.TP
Run in Bahasa Indonesia for one command:
.RS
.B tdoc --lang id scan
.RE

.SH AUTHOR
TDOC Contributors.

.SH LICENSE
MIT License.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR apt (8),
.BR pkg (1),
.BR dpkg (1),
.BR termux-change-repo (1),
.BR bash (1)
